History 306 / American Studies 310

Spring 2012, Mon-Wed, 2.40-4pm

***Freedom and Slavery in Early America***

***Instructor:*** Joseph Yannielli ***Office Hours:*** Monday and
Wednesday

> <jyannielli@wesleyan.edu> by appointment

***Course Description:*** This course explores major themes in Early
American History through the lens of freedom and slavery (and the many
shades in between). Topics include Native American slavery, enslaved
Africans and Atlantic Creoles, the development of gender and racial
hierarchies, popular protest, and the radicalism of the American
Revolution. Coursework and discussion will focus on the analysis of
primary source material (diaries, manifestos, petitions, paintings,
newspaper articles, advertisements) and the interpretive frameworks
offered by various historians.

***Course Structure:*** This course meets twice during the week. As a
general rule, Mondays will set the stage with a work of historical
analysis and Wednesdays will follow up with a close reading of a primary
text or texts. Grades will be determined as follows:

Attendance and Participation……………………….20%

Reading Responses…………………………………20%

Class Presentation…………………………………..20%

Research Paper……………………………………...40%

***Required Books:***

John Demos, *The Unredeemed Captive: A Family Story from Early America*
(1994)

Jill Lepore*, New York Burning: Liberty, Slavery, and Conspiracy in
Eighteenth-Century Manhattan* (2005)

Peter Linebaugh and Marcus Rediker, *The Many-Headed Hydra: Sailors,
Slaves, Commoners, and the Hidden History of the Revolutionary Atlantic*
(2000)

Christina Snyder, *Slavery in Indian Country: The Changing Face of Captivity in Early America* (2010)
=====================================================================================================

David Waldstreicher, *Runaway America: Benjamin Franklin, Slavery, and
the American Revolution* (2004)

***Optional:***

James Brewer Stewart (ed.), *Venture Smith and the Business of Slavery
and Freedom* (2010)

***Selected Supplementary Material:***

Juliana Barr, “From Captives to Slaves: Commodifying Indian Women in the
Borderlands,” *Journal of American History*, vol. 92 (June 2005)

Ira Berlin, *Many Thousands Gone: The First Two Centuries of Slavery in
North America* (1998)

David Brion Davis, *Inhuman Bondage: The Rise and Fall of Slavery in the
New World* (2006)

--------, *The Problem of Slavery in the Age of Revolution, 1770-1823*
(1975)

John Donoghue, “Out of the Land of Bondage: The English Revolution and
the Atlantic Origins of Abolition,” *American Historical Review*, vol.
115 (Oct. 2010)

Maurice Jackson, *Let This Voice Be Heard: Anthony Benezet, Father of
Atlantic Abolitionism* (2009)

Maya Jasanoff, *Liberty’s Exiles: American Loyalists in the
Revolutionary World* (2011)

Edmund S. Morgan, *American Slavery, American Freedom: The Ordeal of
Colonial Virginia* (1975)

Jennifer L. Morgan, “‘Some Could Suckle over Their Shoulder’: Male
Travelers, Female Bodies, and the Gendering of Racial Ideology,
1500-1770,” *William and Mary Quarterly*, vol. 54 (Jan. 1997)

Gary B. Nash, *The Unknown American Revolution: The Unruly Birth of
Democracy and the Struggle to Create America* (2005)

Orlando Patterson, *Slavery and Social Death: A Comparative Study*
(1982)

Marcus Rediker, *The Slave Ship: A Human History* (2007)

Peter Silver, *Our Savage Neighbors: How Indian War Transformed Early
America* (2008)

Wendy Anne Warren, “‘The Cause of Her Grief’: The Rape of a Slave in
Early New England,” *Journal of American History*, vol. 93 (March 2007)

\*Supplementary material, indicated with an asterisk, will be available
online or in class.

***Assignments:***

*Weekly Reading Responses*: You will need to pose at least two
discussion questions each week, based on the assigned reading. These
should be no more than a paragraph in length (maximum 500 words) and
should highlight a particular issue or problem in the text that
surprised or intrigued you. When there is more than one reading, at
least one of your questions should pertain to a different source. These
will be graded as miniature essays. Think critically – pose questions
that are provocative and insightful. Post your response to the class
blog
([*http://hist306.blogs.wesleyan.edu/*](http://hist306.blogs.wesleyan.edu/))
by **noon on Monday**.

*Class Presentation*: Select a week that holds special interest for you
and prepare a 10-minute presentation to be given in class on either
Monday or Wednesday. The presentation should include background
information on the author(s) and major themes. You will be responsible
for leading the class discussion on that day.

*Final Paper*: A 2,000-3,000 word research paper on a topic of your
choice. Use a primary source (or set of sources) to evaluate and
critique the interpretive framework offered by one or more historians.
The topic need not relate to your class presentation, although that
might help. Post your topic and a preliminary bibliography of primary
and secondary sources to the class blog by **March 26**. A writing
sample of at least 500 words is due in class on **April 11**. A polished
and eloquent final draft is due by noon on **May 14.**

***Late Policy and Academic Integrity:***

I expect all assignments to be turned in on time. Late papers will be
penalized 10 points for every 24 hours past the deadline and a note from
your dean or medical professional is necessary for any exceptions.
Evidence of plagiarism or other violations of the honor code will be
taken very seriously.

***Students with Disabilities:***

It is the policy of Wesleyan University to provide reasonable
accommodations to students with documented disabilities. Students,
however, are responsible for registering with Disabilities Services, in
addition to making requests known to us in a timely manner. If you
require accommodations in this class, please make an appointment with us
as soon as possible during the third week of the semester, so that
appropriate arrangements can be made. The procedures for registering
with Disabilities Services can be found at:
[*http://www.wesleyan.edu/deans/disability-students.html*](http://www.wesleyan.edu/deans/disability-students.html).

***Schedule:***

*Week 1* **Defining the Problem: What is Slavery?**

Jan. 30 – Introductions: My Interests and Yours

Feb. 1 – Patterson, “The Constituent Elements of Slavery,” 1-14

Snyder, *Slavery in Indian Country*, 1-12

*Week 2* **Native American Slavery**

Feb. 6 – Snyder, *Slavery in Indian Country*, 13-151

Feb. 8 – Demos, *Unredeemed Captive*, 3-54

Biography of Tisquantum\*

*Week 3* **Captivity Narratives**

Feb. 13 – Demos, *Unredeemed Captive*, 55-252

Feb. 15 – Mary Rowlandson, *The Sovereignty and Goodness of God*
(1682)\*

*Week 4* **The Imperial Context of Freedom and Slavery**

Feb. 20 – Linebaugh and Rediker, *Many-Headed Hydra*, 1-70, 104-142

Donoghue, “Out of the Land of Bondage,” 943-974\*

Feb. 22 – Morgan, “Rebellion,” 250-270\*

Gerrard Winstanley, *The True Levellers Standard Advanced* (1649)\*

> Ann Cotton, “An Account of our Late Troubles in Virginia,” (1676)\*

*Week 5* **Enslaved Africans and Atlantic Creoles**

Feb. 27 – Davis, “How Africans Became Integral to New World History,”
77-102\*

> Berlin, “Emergence of Atlantic Creoles in the Chesapeake” and “The
>
> Tobacco Revolution in the Chesapeake,” 17-46, 109-141\*

Feb. 29 – Ayuba Suleiman Diallo, *Memoirs* and journal extracts
(1734-1738), 17-59\*

The Trans-Atlantic Slave Trade Database

*Week 6* **Gender and Chattel Slavery**

March 5 – Warren, “The Cause of Her Grief,” 1031-1049\*

Morgan, “Some Could Suckle over Their Shoulder,” 167-192\*

Barr, “From Captives to Slaves,” 19-46\*

March 7 – William Byrd, extracts from *The Secret Diary* (1709-1712)\*

Austin & Laurens, ledger (1750-1758)\*

*Week 7* **Pirates and Slave Ships**

March 26 – Linebaugh and Rediker, *Many-Headed Hydra*, 143-173

> Rediker, “The Captain’s Own Hell” and “From Captives to Shipmates,”
> 187-221, 263-307\*
>
> (Paper topic and bibliography due)

March 28 – Charles Johnson, *A General History of the Pyrates* (1724),
157-173\*

John Newton, extracts from *The Journal of a Slave Trader* (1750-1754)\*

Letter of Philip Quaque (1786)\*

*Week 8* **Maroons and the Limits of Resistance**

April 2 – Linebaugh and Rediker, *Many-Headed Hydra*, 174-210

Lepore, *New York Burning*, xi-63

April 4 – Runaway advertisements (various digital databases)

*Week 9* **Slavery and Conspiracy in the Old North**

April 9 – Lepore, *New York Burning*, 64-232

April 11 – Writing workshop

*Week 10* **Religion and Abolitionism**

April 16 – Jackson, “The Early Quaker Antislavery Movement,” 31-56\*

Davis, “The Quaker Ethic and the Antislavery International,” 213-254\*

> Silver, “The Seven Years’ War and the White People,” 95-123\*

April 18 – Anthony Benezet, *Observations on the Inslaving, Importing
and Purchasing of *

*Negroes* (1760), 7-15\*

> Jacobus Capitein, “Is slavery compatible with Christian freedom or
> not?”
>
> (1742), 95-132\*

*Week 11* **Benjamin Franklin and Venture Smith**

April 23 – Waldstreicher, *Runaway America*, 3-172, 241-244

April 25 – Venture Smith, *A Narrative of the Life and Adventures of
Venture* (1798)\*

Stewart (ed.), *Venture Smith and the Business of Slavery and Freedom*,
passim

*Week 12* **The American Revolution**

April 30 – Linebaugh and Rediker, *Many-Headed Hydra*, 211-247

> Waldstreicher, *Runaway America*, 175-239

Nash, “The Dual Revolution,” 207-263\*

May 2 – Slave petitions (1661-1784)\*

> Jonathan Edwards, *The Injustice and Impolicy of the Slave Trade and
> of the *
>
> *Slavery of Africans* (1791), 141-168\*

*Week 13* **Legacies of Slavery and Abolition**

May 7 – Davis, “The Impact of the French and Haitian Revolutions,”
157-174\*

Jasanoff, “Promised Land,” 279-309\*

Snyder, *Slavery in Indian Country*, 213-243

May 9 – David Walker, *Appeal…to the Coloured Citizens of the World*
(1830), 9-49\*

(Final paper due by noon on **May 14**.)

![](media/image1.png)

“The Noble Virginians in the Heat of Battle.” William Hillhouse,
*Pocahontas: A Proclamation* (1820)
