HI 10

Spring 2015

Monday & Thursday, 2-3.15pm

***Origins of the Modern World***

***Instructor:*** Joseph Yannielli

<jyannielli@fairfield.edu>

***Office Hours:*** Mondays and Thursdays in Canisius 320, by
appointment

***Course Description:*** This course, which examines the history of
Europe and its relationship to the world from the end of the Middle Ages
through the 19th century, emphasizes the cultural, social, economic, and
political forces and structures that led to the development of
commercial and industrial capitalism, and the effects of this
development on Europe, the New World, Asia, and Africa. Topics include
the Renaissance and Reformation, the Transatlantic Slave Trade, European
expansion and colonialism, the development of strong nation states, the
Enlightenment, the Industrial Revolution and conflicting ideological and
political responses, changing social, family, and gender relationships,
and the increasing interaction of Europeans and non-Europeans. Critical
analysis of primary and secondary sources develops skills in historical
methodology that are of great value in many other academic pursuits.
Written assignments and class discussions enhance these skills.

***Course Structure:*** Structured around a series of case studies, this
course gives special attention to some of the most trenchant critics of
modernity: freethinkers, peasants, slaves, women, indigenous and
colonial populations, and their allies. Instead of rote memorization of
names and dates, this course approaches history as a continuous clash of
arguments about the human past and its relevance to the present. As a
general rule, each week will combine a work of historical interpretation
(called “secondary sources”) with a close reading of original documents
(called “primary sources”). Weekly discussion questions will help to
focus attention on these documents and the key issues they raise for
understanding the modern world. A series of three essays will draw on
course material to critically engage major topics and themes. The last
two essays will serve as the midterm and final exams. More information
on these assignments can be found below. Grades will be determined as
follows:

Participation......................................20%

Discussion Questions........................20%

First Essay.........................................20%

Midterm Exam..................................20%

Final Exam........................................20%

***Required Books:***

Joseph Conrad, *Heart of Darkness*\*

Natalie Zemon Davis, *The Return of Martin Guerre*

Charles C. Mann, *1493: Uncovering the New World Columbus Created*

Mary Lynn Rampolla, *A Pocket Guide to Writing in History*

Marcus Rediker, *The Amistad Rebellion: An Atlantic Odyssey of Slavery
and Freedom*

\*This book is [available online](http://www.gutenberg.org/ebooks/219).
If you prefer a hard copy, there are several options, the best of which
is the Norton Critical Edition.

***Supplementary Reading:***

Additional reading assignments are underlined and hyperlinked in the
course schedule. Using the digital syllabus, simply click on the link to
open the document. Some links may require your NetID and password. **You
are responsible for bringing these materials to class** on paper,
tablet, laptop, or other device. All films will be screened during class
meetings. The films also are available online through Blackboard or on
loan from the library.

***Assignments:***

*Reading*: The reading for this course averages between 50 and 100 pages
per week. Some documents are quick and easy to read in a single sitting.
Some are dense, complicated arguments that need to be carefully pondered
sentence-by-sentence. Although this can feel overwhelming at first, do
not panic! Take a deep breath. Instead of plowing through everything,
focus your energy on a single chapter, subheading, or document. Pick out
the bits that are most interesting or unusual to you, stop to think, and
take notes as you go along. Active reading is a complex skill that
requires time to develop. Check out section 3a in Rampolla’s *Pocket
Guide* for some excellent tips.

*Participation*: Attendance in class and active participation in class
meetings is essential to success in this course. Please plan ahead and
arrive on time. More than four unexcused absences will impact your final
grade, and more than ten absences may result in a failing grade for the
course. Use of laptops, smartphones, and other devices to enhance
discussion is strongly encouraged.

*Discussion Questions*: You will need to compose at least **two**
discussion questions, based on the assigned reading. These can be as
short as a sentence or as long as a paragraph and should highlight a
particular argument or problem that surprised or intrigued you. Check
out section 2b in Rampolla’s *Pocket Guide* for help generating a good
question.

Choose any two weeks, beginning on week 3, and e-mail your question to
me by **noon on Monday** of that week. I recommend that you choose your
two dates early and circle them on the schedule. Please do not submit
more than one question per week.

*Essays*: There are three essays due as specified on the course
schedule. They are cumulative. Each is longer and more sophisticated
than the last, and they are graded, in part, on their degree of
improvement. The essay prompts will be circulated in advance and posted
on Blackboard. The first two essays will be workshopped in class. The
second and third essays will serve as the midterm and final exams.

All essays should be properly formatted with references cited in
[Chicago-style](http://www.chicagomanualofstyle.org/tools_citationguide.html)
footnotes (bibliographies are not necessary). All except the final
should be submitted in stapled, double-spaced hardcopy. These essays
test your ability to synthesize course material into a coherent
argument. **No outside research is required**. Dictionaries,
encyclopedias, lectures, and websites are not always reliable and should
not be cited as such in your coursework. Consult chapters 4 and 7 in
Rampolla’s *Pocket Guide* for detailed instructions on how to organize,
draft, and document your essays. I also encourage you to make an
appointment with the [Writing
Center](http://www.fairfield.edu/academics/schoolscollegescenters/collegeofartssciences/centersspecialprograms/thewritingcenter/)
for free personalized assistance.

***Late Policy and Other Scary Things:***

I expect all coursework to be turned in on time. Late assignments will
be penalized 10 points for every 24 hours past the deadline and a note
from a medical professional or school administrator is necessary for any
exceptions. Evidence of plagiarism or other violations of the [Honor
Code](http://www.fairfield.edu/academics/academicresources/honorcode/)
will be taken very seriously. See chapter 6 in Rampolla’s *Pocket Guide*
for further discussion and suggestions on avoiding plagiarism.

***History Department Statement on Academic Honesty: ***

Fairfield University is committed to a policy of academic honesty. All
use of others’ words or ideas must be noted with proper quotation and
either footnotes or parentheses. This includes use of materials from
websites. Any plagiarism is grounds for failure, not only for the
assignment in question, but for the course as well. If you have any
questions at all about this, please see your instructor BEFORE the
assignment is due.

Students are often confused by just what constitutes plagiarism. When
the ideas or writings of others are presented in assignments, these
ideas or writing should be attributed to that source. Special care
should be taken, when cutting and pasting materials or when
paraphrasing, to cite sources correctly and to use quotation marks
around exact words from source materials. Actions that result in
plagiarism may be intentional or unintentional. Consequently, students
must understand the concept of plagiarism. When reading, processing, or
using materials from any source, appropriate documentation is always
essential. Resources such as the Library and the Writing Center are
available on campus to assist you. You are encouraged to take advantage
of these resources.

The official Fairfield University statement on plagiarism includes the
following, which I will enforce: “in all academic work, students are
expected to submit materials that are their own. Examples of dishonest
conduct include but are not limited to: … plagiarism, the appropriation
of information, ideas, or the language of other persons or writers and
the submission of them as one’s own to satisfy the requirements of a
course … In the event of such dishonesty, professors are to award a
grade of zero for the project, paper, or examination in question, and
may record an ‘F’ for the course itself.” This includes the failure to
quote or cite quotations from another source.

***Students with Disabilities:***

Fairfield University is committed to achieving equal educational
opportunities, providing students with documented disabilities access to
all University programs, services and activities. In order for this
course to be equally accessible to all students, different
accommodations or adjustments may need to be implemented. The Office of
Disability Support Services (DSS) is available at <DSS@fairfield.edu>,
and at (203) 254-4000 ext. 2615.

They are your primary resource on campus to help you develop an
accessibility plan to help you achieve success in your courses this
semester. Please make an appointment with them as early as possible this
semester to receive letters to present to me so that we can discuss how
potential accommodations can be provided and carried out for this
course. If you have received Accommodation Letters for this course from
DSS, please provide me with that information privately so that we can
review your accommodations together and discuss how best to help you
achieve equal access in this course this semester.

![](media/image1.jpg)

A French postcard from the turn of the twentieth century imagines a
history classroom “in the year 2000.”

***Schedule:***

*Week 1*

Jan. 20 – No Class

Jan. 22 – Introductions

*Week 2*

Jan. 26 – What is Modernity?

Jan. 29 – The Columbian Invasion

**Reading:** Mann, *1493*, 3-47

> Zinn, “[Columbus, the Indians, and Human
> Progress](http://www.historyisaweapon.com/defcon1/zinncol1.html)”

Berliner, “[Columbus Day: A Time to
Celebrate](http://capitalismmagazine.com/2014/10/columbus-day-a-time-to-celebrate/)”

*Week 3*

Feb. 2 – Native Americans and Europeans

Feb. 5 – Writing Lab (first essay due in class)

**Reading:** Mann, *1493*, 51-151

Sepúlveda, *Second Democrates*,
[excerpt](http://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu/active_learning/explorations/spain/spain_sepulveda.cfm)

Montaigne, *Essays*, “[Of
Cannibals](http://genius.com/Michel-de-montaigne-des-cannibales-of-cannibals-annotated/)”

LeClerq, *New Relation of Gaspesia*,
[excerpt](http://historymatters.gmu.edu/d/5828)

*Week 4*

Feb. 9 – Film: *The Imposter*

Feb. 12 – The Renaissance of Arnaud du Tilh

**Reading:** Davis, *Return of Martin Guerre* (entire)

*Week 5*

Feb. 17 (Tuesday) – No Class

Feb. 19 – The Reformation of Bertrande de Rols

**Reading:** Finlay, “[The Refashioning of Martin
Guerre](http://www.jstor.org/stable/1868102)”

Davis, “[On the Lame](http://www.jstor.org/stable/1868103)”

*Week 6*

Feb. 23 – The Slave Trade

Feb. 26 – [Runaway Connecticut](http://runawayct.org)

**Reading:** Mann, *1493*, 359-488

[Letters from Nzinga Mbemba to João
III](https://fairfield.blackboard.com/bbcswebdav/xid-1174852_1)

Equiano, *Interesting Narrative*,
[excerpt](https://history.hanover.edu/texts/Equiano/equiano_ch2_a.html)

“[The Woman whose Child returned to
Life](https://fairfield.blackboard.com/bbcswebdav/xid-1176910_1)”

*Week 7*

March 2 – The Age of Reason

March 5 – Writing Lab (second essay due in class)

**Reading:** Kant, “[What is
Enlightenment?](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/kant-whatis.asp)”

Swift, “[A Modest
Proposal](http://andromeda.rutgers.edu/~jlynch/Texts/modest.html)”

Wollstonecraft, *Vindication of the Rights of Woman*,
[excerpt](http://www.bartleby.com/144/13.html)

Condorcet, *Progress of the Human Mind*,
[excerpt](http://www.jstor.org/stable/20027931)

Paine, [Letter to a
Friend](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/paine-essaysreligion.asp#On%20Death2)

\*\*Spring Break\*\*

*Week 8*

March 16 – The Haitian Revolution

March 19 – Film: *Amistad*

**Reading:** Rediker, *Amistad Rebellion* (begin)

[Haitian Declaration of
Independence](http://today.duke.edu/showcase/haitideclaration/declarationstext.html)

[Letter from Kale to John Quincy
Adams](http://www.digitalhistory.uh.edu/disp_textbook.cfm?smtID=3&psid=3927)

*Week 9*

March 23 – Film: *Amistad*

March 26 – Emancipation and Reparations

**Reading:** Rediker, *Amistad Rebellion* (finish)

CARICOM Reparations Commission, [press
statement](http://caricom.org/jsp/pressreleases/press_releases_2013/pres285_13.jsp)

Yannielli, “[Follow the
Money](http://histi3.commons.yale.edu/2013/03/01/follow-the-money/)”

> [Slavery Footprint](http://slaveryfootprint.org)

*Week 10*

March 30 – Film: *The Genius of Charles Darwin* (Part 1)

April 2 – The Darwinian Revolution

**Reading:** Desmond and Moore (eds.), *Descent of Man*,
[xi-lviii](https://fairfield.blackboard.com/bbcswebdav/xid-1176922_1)

Darwin, *Descent of Man*,
[excerpt](http://www.fordham.edu/halsall/mod/1871darwin.asp)

Secord (ed.), *Evolutionary Writings*,
[212-230](https://fairfield.blackboard.com/bbcswebdav/xid-1176924_1)

*Week 11*

April 6 – No Class

April 9 – Capitalism

**Reading:** Blackburn, “[Lincoln and
Marx](https://www.jacobinmag.com/2012/08/lincoln-and-marx/)”

> Marx and Engels, *Communist Manifesto*,
> [excerpt](https://www.marxists.org/archive/marx/works/1848/communist-manifesto/ch01.htm#007)
>
> More, *Utopia*,
> [excerpt](https://fairfield.blackboard.com/bbcswebdav/xid-1176911_1)
>
> Carnegie,
> “[Wealth](http://www.swarthmore.edu/SocSci/rbannis1/AIH19th/Carnegie.html)”
>
> Brecht, “[A Worker Reads
> History](http://allpoetry.com/A-Worker-Reads-History)”

*Week 12*

April 13 – Agricultural and Industrial Revolution

April 16 – Wikipedia Lab

**Reading:** Mann, *1493*, 251-355

Conrad, *Heart of Darkness* (begin)

*Week 13*

April 20 – Film: *Concerning Violence*

April 23 – Imperialism

**Reading:** Hochschild, “[Meeting Mr.
Kurtz](https://fairfield.blackboard.com/bbcswebdav/users/jyannielli/Hochschild%20-%20Meeting%20Mr.%20Kurtz.pdf)”

Conrad, *Heart of Darkness* (finish)

Césaire, *Discourse on Colonialism*,
[31-46](https://fairfield.blackboard.com/bbcswebdav/xid-1176930_1)

*Week 14*

April 27 – Film: *Iron Jawed Angels*

April 30 – Votes for Women

**Reading:** Lepore, “[The Last
Amazon](http://www.newyorker.com/magazine/2014/09/22/last-amazon)”

> Pankhurst, “[Why We are
> Militant](http://spot.pcc.edu/~rflynn/HST_103/Online%20Readings/Pankhurst.html)”
>
> Davison, “[The Outrage in Strangeways
> Gaol”](https://fairfield.blackboard.com/bbcswebdav/users/jyannielli/The%20Outrage%20in%20Strangeways%20Gaol.pdf)
>
> Luxemburg, “[Women’s Suffrage and Class
> Struggle](http://marxists.org/archive/luxemburg/1912/05/12.htm)”

Addams et al., *Women at the Hague*,
[excerpt](http://womhist.alexanderstreet.com/hague/doc1.htm)

\*\*Final exam due before midnight on May 7\*\*
