HIST 105J / AFST 105 / AFAM 235

Fall 2013, Wednesday, 3.30-5.20pm

***The American Encounter with Africa***

***Instructor:*** Joseph Yannielli

> <joseph.yannielli@yale.edu>

***Office Hours:*** Monday and Wednesday, by appointment

***Course Description:*** It is impossible to understand the history of
America apart from the history of Africa, and it is impossible to
understand the history of Africa apart from the history of America. From
the Columbian Exchange to the recent events in Libya and Egypt, this
seminar explores the long and complex relationship between Africa and
the United States. Topics include the rise and demise of the
transatlantic slave trade, piracy, zombies, religious missions,
emigration, colonialism, resistance movements, and humanitarian and
military interventions. We will examine the interpretive frameworks
offered by various historians as well as original documents (films,
images, letters, newspaper articles, novels, pamphlets, travelogues).

***Course Structure:*** This seminar meets once during the week. As a
general rule, each meeting will incorporate a major work of historical
analysis as well as a close reading of a primary text or texts. Both
traditional and digital research skills will be emphasized throughout.
Grades will be determined as follows:

Attendance and Participation……………………….30%

Class Presentation…………………………………..10%

Weekly Responses………………………………….30%

Research Paper……………………………………...30%

***Required Books:***

Ala Alryyes (ed.), *A Muslim American Slave: The Life of Omar Ibn Said*

Saidiya Hartman, *Lose Your Mother: A Journey Along the Atlantic Slave
Route*

Gerald Horne, *Mau Mau in Harlem? The U.S. and the Liberation of Kenya*

Marcus Rediker, *The Amistad Rebellion: An Atlantic Odyssey of Slavery
and Freedom*

Andrew Zimmerman, *Alabama in Africa: Booker T. Washington, the German
Empire, and the Globalization of the New South*

***Supplementary Primary Material:***

Robert Adams, *The Narrative of Robert Adams: An American sailor who was wrecked on the western coast of Africa, in the year 1810, was detained three years in slavery by the Arabs of the Great Desert, and resided several months in the City of Tombuctoo* (1816)

David F. Bacon, *Wanderings on the Seas and Shores of Africa* (1843)

Edgar Rice Burroughs, *Tarzan of the Apes* (1914)

W. E. B. Du Bois, “Little Portraits of Africa,” *The Crisis* 27 (April
1924)

Paul B. Du Chaillu, *Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial Africa*
(1861)

Pauline E. Hopkins, *Of One Blood: Or, The Hidden Self* (1902)

Maria Martin, *History of the Captivity and Sufferings of Mrs. Maria
Martin, Who was Six Years a Slave in Algiers* (1807)

Hannah More to William Harned, Oct. 12, 1852, Sierra Leone Collection,
American Missionary Association Archives

John Newton, *The Journal of a Slave Trader* (1750-1754)

Eslanda Goode Robeson, *African Journey* (1945)

George Thompson, *The Palm Land, or West Africa Illustrated* (1859)

***Supplementary Secondary Material:***

Tunde Adeleke, *UnAfrican Americans: Nineteenth-Century Black
Nationalists and the Civilizing Mission*

Elizabeth Alexander, “The Negro Digs Up Her Past: ‘Amistad’,” *South
Atlantic Quarterly* 104 (Summer 2005)

Paul Baepler, “The Barbary Captivity Narrative in American Culture,”
*Early American Literature* 39 (2004)

James T. Campbell, *Middle Passages: African American Journeys to
Africa, 1787-2005*

Judith A. Carney and Richard Nicholas Rosomoff, *In the Shadow of
Slavery: Africa’s Botanical Legacy in the Atlantic World*

David Eltis, Philip Morgan, and David Richardson, “Agency and Diaspora
in Atlantic History: Reassessing the African Contribution to Rice
Cultivation in the Americas,” *American Historical Review* 112 (Dec.
2007)

Sharla M. Fett, “Middle Passages and Forced Migrations: Liberated
Africans in Nineteenth-Century US Camps and Ships,” *Slavery &
Abolition* 31 (March 2010)

Gwendolyn Midlo Hall, “Africa and Africans in the African Diaspora: The
Uses of Relational Databases,” *American Historical Review* 115 (Feb.
2010)

Adam Hochschild, *King Leopold’s Ghost: A Story of Greed, Terror, and
Heroism in Colonial Africa*

Lysle E. Meyer, *The Farther Frontier: Six Case Studies of Americans and
Africa, 1848-1936*

Robert W. Rydell, “‘Darkest Africa’: African Shows at America’s World’s
Fairs, 1893-1940,” in Bernth Lindfors (ed.) *Africans on Stage: Studies
in Ethnological Show Business*

\*Supplementary material will be made available online or in class. Film
clips will be screened in class, and DVD copies will be on reserve at
the [Film Study Center](http://its.yale.edu/centers/film-study-center)
(53 Wall St., Room B7).

***Assignments:***

*Weekly Responses*: You will need to pose two discussion questions
**each week**, based on the assigned reading. These should total at
least two paragraphs in length (maximum 500 words) and should highlight
a particular issue or problem in the text that surprised or intrigued
you. When there is both primary and secondary material, at least one of
your questions should pertain to a different source. These will be
graded as miniature essays. Think carefully – pose questions that are
provocative and insightful. To receive full credit, your response should
be appropriately titled, categorized, and tagged. When possible, it
should include relevant film clips, images, and links. Post your
response to the course blog (<http://hist10501f2013.commons.yale.edu/>)
by noon on Wednesday.

*News Items*: You are encouraged to share recent news items, op-eds,
reports, videos, policy papers, interviews, and reviews related to the
subjects and themes of this course. Everyone should post at least one
news item to the course blog at some point before the final class
meeting in December. Embed a teaser or summary of the report’s contents
in your post and include a link to the source. This assignment will
serve as your reading response for the final class meeting.

*Class Presentation*: Select a week that holds special interest for you
and prepare a 10-minute presentation to be given in class. Depending on
the size of the class, you may have to split or share the reading. The
presentation should include pertinent background information on the
authors and major themes. You do not need to submit a reading response
on the day of your presentation. You will be responsible for leading the
class discussion on that day.

*Final Paper*: A six-to-eight page (1,500-2,000 words) research paper on
a topic of your choice. Use a primary source, or set of sources, to
evaluate and critique the interpretive framework offered by one or more
historians. The topic need not relate to your class presentation,
although that might help. Post a topic statement and a preliminary
bibliography of primary and secondary sources to the course blog by
**October 2**. A writing sample of at least five pages is due in class
on **November 13**. A polished and eloquent final draft is due before
midnight on Wednesday, **December 11**. More detailed instructions for
this assignment will be provided in class.

***Late Policy and Academic Integrity:***

I expect all assignments to be turned in on time. Late papers will be
penalized 10 points for every 24 hours past the deadline and a note from
your dean or medical professional is necessary for any exceptions.
Evidence of plagiarism or other violations of university policy will be
taken seriously. Penalties for plagiarism include suspension, failing
grades, and expulsion. Consult [Yale’s Academic Integrity
Policy](http://yalecollege.yale.edu/content/cheating-plagiarism-and-documentation)
and the [Yale College Writing
Center](http://writing.yalecollege.yale.edu/using-sources) for further
information.

***Students with Disabilities:***

Students with documented disabilities must register with the Resource
Office on Disabilities (ROS) before placing a course accommodation
request. Please make an appointment with the ROS or consult the [office
website](http://yalecollege.yale.edu/content/resource-office-disabilities)
for further information.

***Schedule:***

*1^st^ Encounter* **Introduction**

Aug. 28 – The President and the Zombie

*2^nd^ Encounter* **The Slave Trade I**

Sept. 4 – Hartman, *Lose Your Mother*, 3-135

Film: Traces of the Trade

*3^rd^ Encounter* **The Slave Trade II**

Sept. 11 – Hartman, *Lose Your Mother*, 136-235

Newton, *Journal of a Slave Trader*, 54-57, 70-75

> [Yale Slavery and Abolition Portal](http://slavery.yale.edu/)
>
> Field Trip: Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Library

*4^th^ Encounter* **Africans in America**

Sept. 18 – Eltis, Morgan, and Richardson, “Agency and Diaspora in
Atlantic History,”

1329-1358

Hall, “Africa and Africans in the African Diaspora,” 136-150

Alryyes, *A Muslim American Slave*, 3-79, 95-132, 195-220

Film: Prince Among Slaves

(Optional: Carney and Rosomoff, *In the Shadow of Slavery*, 80-99)

Sept. 20 – Visit by the President of Sierra Leone, Ernest Bai Koroma

*5^th^ Encounter* **Americans in Africa**

Sept. 25 – Alryyes, *A Muslim American Slave*, 152-161

Baepler, “Barbary Captivity Narrative,” 217-246

Adams, *The Narrative of Robert Adams*, 29-83

Martin, *History of the Captivity and Sufferings of Mrs. Maria Martin*,
41-72

Film: The Wind and the Lion

*6^th^ Encounter* **Emigration and Colonization**

Oct. 2 – Campbell, *Middle Passages*, 15-56

Adeleke, *UnAfrican Americans*, 43-69

Bacon, *Wanderings on the Seas and Shores of Africa*, 17-24, 75-79,
168-173

[Letters from Liberia](http://etext.lib.virginia.edu/subjects/liberia/)

**\*Topic statements due\***

*7^th^ Encounter* **Amistad I**

Oct. 9 – Rediker, *The Amistad Rebellion*, 1-121

> Alexander, “The Negro Digs Up Her Past,” 463-480
>
> More to Harned (1852)

Film: Amistad

Field Trip: Grove Street Cemetery and Amistad Memorial

*8^th^ Encounter* **Amistad II**

Oct. 16 – Rediker, *The Amistad Rebellion*, 122-237

> Articles from the *American and Foreign Anti-Slavery Reporter* (1842)
>
> Thompson, *Palm Land*, passim
>
> (Optional: Fett, “Middle Passages,” 75-98)

*9^th^ Encounter* **Exploration**

Oct. 30 – Hochschild, *King Leopold’s Ghost*, 21-32, 47-57

> Meyer, *The Farther Frontier*, 33-62

Du Chaillu, *Explorations and Adventures in Equatorial Africa*, 478-499

> Hopkins, *Of One Blood*, 339-348, 423-432
>
> Burroughs, *Tarzan of the Apes*, 105-144

*10^th^ Encounter* **The Global South**

Nov. 6 – Zimmerman, *Alabama in Africa*, 1-19, 112-204

Rydell, “Darkest Africa,” 135-155

Articles from the *Daily Inter Ocean* (1893)

Du Bois, “Little Portraits of Africa,” 273-274

*11^th^ Encounter* **Writing Workshop**

Nov. 13 – \***Draft essays due in class\***

*12^th^ Encounter* **Colonialism**

Nov. 20 – Horne, *Mau Mau in Harlem*, 1-128

Robeson, *African Journey*, 13-20, 104-107, 150-152

Articles from *Freedom* (1953)

Film: Sanders of the River

*13^th^ Encounter* **Resistance**

Dec. 4 – Horne, *Mau Mau in Harlem*, 129-240

[African Activist Archive](http://africanactivist.msu.edu/)

News items of your choice

Dec. 11 – **\*Final papers due before midnight\***
